LINUX FILE MANAGEMENT – OBSERVATIONS / EXPLANATION

1.  Directory Creation Observation: The mkdir -p command successfully
    created the directories docs, src, config, and scripts. The -p
    option creates parent directories if they do not already exist and
    does not produce an error if the directory already exists.

2.  File Creation Observation: The touch command created the required
    files:

-   design_notes.txt
-   main.py
-   settings.conf
-   deploy.sh

Initially, all files were empty.

3.  Writing Data into Files Observation: The echo command was used to
    write text into the files. The files design_notes.txt, main.py, and
    settings.conf contained the expected content after execution.

4.  Error While Creating deploy.sh Observation: The command containing
    #!/bin/bash produced the error:
    -bash: !/bin/bash\necho: event not found

Explanation: Bash interpreted the ! as a history expansion character.
Therefore, the command failed and deploy.sh remained empty. Using single
quotes or escaping the ! prevents this error.

5.  Listing Files Observation: The ls -lR ProjectWorkspace command
    displayed the complete directory tree, file names, permissions,
    ownership, file sizes, and timestamps. This verified that the
    project structure was created successfully.

6.  umask Verification Observation: The default umask value was 0022. A
    file created with this setting had default permissions that allowed
    read access to group and others.

After changing the umask to 027, newly created files became more
restrictive. Other users received no permissions and group write
permission was removed.

7.  Permission Changes Observation: The chmod command successfully
    changed permissions.

Permissions assigned: - settings.conf → 600 - design_notes.txt → 640 -
main.py → 644 - Directories → 750 - deploy.sh → 750

Explanation: Sensitive files such as settings.conf were protected by
allowing access only to the owner, while executable scripts and
directories were given execute permission where required.

8.  Creating Group and User Observation: A new group named projectteam
    and a new user named devuser were successfully created using
    administrative privileges.

9.  Changing Ownership Observation: The command
    sudo chown -R devuser:projectteam ProjectWorkspace changed the owner
    of all project files and directories from the original user to
    devuser and the group to projectteam.

10. Permission Denied Error Observation: After ownership changed, the
    original user received “Permission denied” while accessing the
    project subdirectories.

Explanation: The directories had permission 750, which grants access
only to: - Owner (Read, Write, Execute) - Group (Read, Execute) - Others
(No permission)

Since the original user was neither the owner nor an authorized group
member, access to the directories was denied.

Overall Observation: The experiment successfully demonstrated Linux file
management, file creation, directory management, permission control
using umask and chmod, ownership management using chown, and user/group
administration. It also showed how incorrect permissions or ownership
can restrict access to files and directories, improving system security.
